Update wcag-ruleset-review-process.md (#515)
w3c/wcag-act: wcag-ruleset-review-process.md

# ACT Publication Process

This document describes a process for writing, reviewing, approving, and maintaining Accessibility Conformance Testing (ACT) Rules for formal publication by the W3C Accessibility Guidelines Working Group (AGWG). Such a commonly agreed upon WCAG Ruleset contributes to more consistent interpretation of how to test conformance to the W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG), more consistent results from conformance testing, and more transparency and documentation of the testing process.

> Much of the tasks in this process are delegated to ACT Task Force, which is a sub-group of AGWG. ACT TF carries out initial review and prepares proposals for AGWG, which has the final say as the maintainer of WCAG and the authoritative body for interpretation.

Reviewer: Much of the tasks in this process are delegated to ACT Task Force, which is a sub-group of AGWG. 
--> 
Much of the tasks in this process are delegated to ACT Task Force (ACT TF), which is a sub-group of AGWG.

Author: ```suggestion
Much of the tasks in this process are delegated to ACT Task Force (ACT TF), which is a sub-group of AGWG. ACT TF carries out initial review and prepares proposals for AGWG, which has the final say as the maintainer of WCAG and the authoritative body for interpretation.
```

> The ACT TF does this work in close collaboration with the ACT Rules Community Group through regular joint meetings. Any other groups interested to contribute rules to the WCAG ruleset should contact the co-facilitator(s) of the ACT Task Force. The ACT publication process is designed to publish high-quality ACT rules to the W3C website. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rule writing, reviewing, approving, and maintaining is a joint work between the ACT TF and the ACT Rules Community Group through regular joint meetings. Any other groups interested to contribute rules to the WCAG ruleset should contact the co-facilitator(s) of the ACT Task Force. The ACT publication process is designed to publish high-quality ACT rules to the W3C website. 
```

> The ACT TF does this work in close collaboration with the ACT Rules Community Group through regular joint meetings. Any other groups interested to contribute rules to the WCAG ruleset should contact the co-facilitator(s) of the ACT Task Force. The ACT publication process is designed to publish high-quality ACT rules to the W3C website. 

Reviewer: Is "interested to contribute" correct, og should it be "interested in contributing"?
I at least found it a bit hard to read. 

Found this on the subject (https://jakubmarian.com/interested-in-doing-vs-interested-to-do-in-english/): 
`“Interested to” can be used only with verbs of perception and “knowing”, such as:see, hear, read, learn, know, find out, …`

## ACT Publication steps

> When creating a new rule, or updating a rule, there are five steps to go through. This process involves the combined effort of the ACT Task Force, and the ACT Rules Community Group. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating a new rule, or updating a rule, there are five steps to go through. This process involves the combined effort of the ACT Task Force and the ACT Rules Community Group. 
```

1. Draft proposal
2. Call for review
3. Call for implementation
4. Validation

> 5. Publish approval

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Publication approval
```

### 1. Draft proposal

New rules, and changes to rules are made through GitHub pull requests. Any member of either ACT group can author such a pull request. A pull request must have approval from three independent reviewers before it can proceed to step 2. These reviewers can not work for the same organization, and must not have been involved in writing the pull request. 

> The pull request description must include information on the type of change the pull request makes, and what happens in the "call for review" phase. There are three options:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The pull request description must include information on the type of change the pull request makes and what happens in the "call for review" phase. There are three options:
```
I don't think this is a correct use of a comma (I do this a lot myself and am trying to get out of the habit.). I think the same thing applies to the list below.

> 1. New rules, and significant changes that impact multiple rules should have a **two week** call for review. 

Reviewer 3: These might actually need to be:
`New rules, and significant changes that impact multiple rules, should have a **two week** call for review.`

Not the best at grammar so ignore if your confident.

Reviewer 2: Or I think they could be:

```suggestion
New rules and significant changes that impact multiple rules should have a **two week** call for 
```

2. Updates to rules, and changes to definitions used in a small number of rules have a **one week** call for review.
3. Editorial changes, including minor changes to test cases can **skip** call for review.

### 2. Call for review

> Once a pull request has the necessary approvals, the author of the pull request sends an e-mail to the ACT Rules community group mailing list with the text "[for review]" in the subject. The e-mail must include a link to the pull request, and an indication of the duration and end date of the call for review. 

Reviewer: Once a pull request has the necessary approvals, the author of the pull request sends an e-mail to the ACT Rules community group...
-->
Once a pull request has the necessary approvals, the author of the pull request sends an e-mail to the ACT Rules Community Group... (capitalization)

Author: (Just making this a little easier to pull in)

```suggestion
Once a pull request has the necessary approvals, the author of the pull request sends an e-mail to the ACT Rules Community Group mailing list with the text "[for review]" in the subject. The e-mail must include a link to the pull request, and an indication of the duration and end date of the call for review. 
```

1. If no changes are requested on the pull request during the review period, the author is free to merge the pull request. 

> 2. Otherwise, the author must resolve the requested changes. A comment is resolved when it has approval from the original commenter, and at least two other reviewers. This can happen during or after the call for review. Depending on the change, one of the following happens:

Reviewer 2: Shall we make explicit how these approvals to comments should be recorded?

Reviewing and approving a pull request may be pretty straight forward if you are familiar with the process. Approving a comment can be done in multiple ways: replying to the comment in GitHub, sending an email, in a follow-up chat...

Author: Need to clarify "approval" is on a pull request.

>   1. If the changes are editorial, the pull request can be merged any time after the review period.
>   2. If the changes are not editorial, repeat step 1, followed by a **one week** call for review.

Author: ```suggestion
    1. If the changes are editorial, the pull request can be merged any time after the review period.
    2. If the changes are not editorial, repeat step 1, followed by a **one week** call for review.
```

> When a pull request is merged, the rule is published on the WAI website with a clear indicator that the rule, or the update to the rule is a "proposal". Additionally, metadata for the rule is published, so that implementors of ACT rules can create an implementation report for the proposed rule.
> 
> ### 3. Call for implementation

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Call for implementation

When a pull request is merged, the rule is published on the WAI website with a clear indicator that the rule, or the update to the rule is a "proposal". Additionally, metadata for the rule is published, so that implementors of ACT rules can create an implementation report for the proposed rule.
```

> When there is at least **one complete implementation** of the rule, the proposal can proceed to the validation phase. See [complete implementations](#complete-implementations).

Reviewer 4: Back in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/577 and https://www.w3.org/2019/06/27-act-r-minutes.html#item03 the CG decided that 3 implementations were needed. I couldn't find when we decided to go down to only 1 implementation.
Apparently, we also decided for a CG CFC before sending to the TF, which never happened… So I guess this was maybe changed at a later point, but when?

Author: The ACT TF added its own requirements for implementations in August 2020. Here's the PR of it: #472. With this proposal the CG now adopts that requirement.

### 4. Validation

Once the proposal has a complete implementation, a facilitator of the ACT Task Force creates a survey for the rule, in which Task Force and Community Group members are asked the following questions:

- Does the rule follow the ACT Rules Format 1.0?
- Is the rule up to date?
- Are the assumptions acceptable?
- Is the rule consistent with existing accessibility standards?
- Are there any remaining open issues for this rule that were opened prior to this review?
- Do you have any further questions or concerns about this rule?
- Do you think this rule is ready to be published?

> This survey will be open for at least 5 work days, to give ACT Task Force members sufficient time to review the rule. No more than 5 rule surveys will be due in the same week.

Reviewer 5: This survey will be open for at least 5 **working** days

Author: Working day is more commonly used to refer to the hours of the day in which someone works, whereas work day is the actual day. I think this should be work day. Leaving it as is.

To go to the next step, the survey must include 5 approvals to publish, and no objections. If the survey shows changes are needed to the rule, a liaison is picked for the rule, who is responsible for drafting a proposal (step 1) to update the rule. If available, the liaison for a rule is one of the rule's authors. The liaison has 5 work days to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal) that is ready for reviewers.

If the precise changes are editorial (to be approved in step 1), and are pre-agreed on by all participants in the survey, the updated change will skip the validation stage. This has to be recorded as a decision in meeting minutes of the ACT Task Force.

> ### 5. Publish Approval

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 5. Publication Approval
```

Once a rule is validated, an ACT TF facilitator will request that AG approve the rule. These requests can be grouped, and handled as a batch. This is decided between the ACT facilitator(s) and the AG chairs. The AG Working Group will have its own process for deciding whether or not to publish updates to the WCAG Ruleset. For example, AG may decide to have Call For Consensus e-mail or send out a survey.

Based on the feedback from AG, one of three things can happen:

1. If AG approves the changes, the rule is republished on the WAI website with the "proposal" indicator removed (i.e. it is published as an approved rule).

> 2. If AG requests editorial changes, a [drafts proposal](#1-draft-proposal) is created. Once merged, the updated rule is republished on the WAI website with the "proposal" indicator removed. This skips the implementations or validation steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If AG requests editorial changes, a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal) is created. Once merged, the updated rule is republished on the WAI website with the "proposal" indicator removed. This skips the implementations or validation steps.
```

> 2. If AG requests editorial changes, a [drafts proposal](#1-draft-proposal) is created. Once merged, the updated rule is republished on the WAI website with the "proposal" indicator removed. This skips the implementations or validation steps.

Author: ```suggestion
2. If AG requests editorial changes, a [drafts proposal](#1-draft-proposal) is created by an ACT facilitator. Once merged, the updated rule is republished on the WAI website with the "proposal" indicator removed. This skips the implementations or validation steps.
```

> 3. If AG requests non-editorial, the liaison is tasked to [drafts proposal](#1-draft-proposal).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. If AG requests non-editorial, the liaison is tasked to [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).
```

## Public Feedback

> Public feedback received on the WCAG Ruleset is processed by the ACT Task Force. Questions or issues can either be submitted directly into the ACT Task Force GitHub repository, or be copied into GitHub issues from questions sent to the ACT public mailing list.

Reviewer 4: For the WCAG ruleset, I guess we'll also be getting feedback sent to the AG or the CG, rather than the TF (typically, as issues on their respective Github repos). Do we need to duplicate these issues on the TF repo?
I'm notably concerned with the CG repo where there is next to no triaging happening on the issues, and where we might end up just fixing the issues rather than moving them to the TF repo (which requires digging out to remember if a rule is a WCAG published one or not).

Author: I don't quite know the practical implications yet. We should avoid duplicate issues, so we're going to need to funnel everything to the same place. We might just end up with a shared repo between TF / CG for rules and definitions.

Wherever possible, the ACT Task Force will work with the ACT Rules Community Group to come up with a joint answer to the questions. If the comment is about a proposed rule, or a proposed change to a rule a public issue is created, and an answer is sent referencing the issue. If the comment is on an approved rule and changes are necessary, a liaison is picked, and the change request is handled as survey feedback, starting in the [validation](#4-validation) step. 

> For the ACT Task Force agenda, public feedback will be prioritised over review of proposed rules. This ensures responsiveness to the wider community. The ACT Task Force should respond to questions within 5 work days. This may be a reply which indicates when an answers is expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the ACT Task Force agenda, public feedback will be prioritised over review of proposed rules. This ensures responsiveness to the wider community. The ACT Task Force should respond to questions within 5 work days. This may be a reply which indicates when an answer is expected.
```

> For the ACT Task Force agenda, public feedback will be prioritised over review of proposed rules. This ensures responsiveness to the wider community. The ACT Task Force should respond to questions within 5 work days. This may be a reply which indicates when an answers is expected.

Author: Emma suggested:

```suggestion
For the ACT Task Force agenda, public feedback will be prioritised over review of proposed rules. This ensures responsiveness to the wider community. The ACT Task Force should respond to questions within 5 work days. This may be a brief reply that indicates when a full response is expected.
```

## Annual Review

> Since technologies and standards frequently change, rules require regular maintenance. To ensure quality over time, the ACT Task Force will review every **approved rule** in the WCAG Ruleset at least once a year, to ensure it is still current and correct. If any changes are deemed necessary, a liaison is picked and the change request is handled as survey feedback, starting in the [validation](#4-validation) step. 

Reviewer 4: I guess some of the oldest published rules are reaching the 1 year mark (https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/1120 doesn't track publication date, but is from pre-covid times…)
Is this review process planned already for these rules?

Author: Yeah, the TF is already doing this.

> Every time a rule is [validated](#4-validation), it is checked to make sure it is up to date. This counts as an annual review, so that only rules that have not been surveyed in 12 months need to go through a separate review. If a rule has not been reviewed for 12 months, an ACT facilitator opens an issue for it, and assigns it to that rule's liaison. The liaison has 10 work days to review if the rule needs to be updated. If the rule needs to be updated, the liaison has another 10 work days to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure who the "rule's liaison" exactly is (since it is different from the ACT facilitator).
It is a bit of a strong requirement to give people a 10 work days deadline.
At https://github.com/w3c/wcag-act/pull/515/files#diff-1c6fbe9f1dcc2b7aeae3ce3d63c69e16cb5039c91b5b49a5ca0b8516897de840R80 it is a global deadline for the TF to answer, which makes sense, but here it seems to be an individual deadline. The way this sentence is written, it feels like  "that rule's liaison" is a well defined pre-existing person (the CG member who sent the rule to the TF, maybe?) If so, it is a strong requirement to ask them to be able to act within 10 work days at some unspecified point in the future.

Author: Liaisons can change. If whoever's the current liaison can't do it in 10 days, someone else needs to take over.

> Every time a rule is [validated](#4-validation), it is checked to make sure it is up to date. This counts as an annual review, so that only rules that have not been surveyed in 12 months need to go through a separate review. If a rule has not been reviewed for 12 months, an ACT facilitator opens an issue for it, and assigns it to that rule's liaison. The liaison has 10 work days to review if the rule needs to be updated. If the rule needs to be updated, the liaison has another 10 work days to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).

Author: Should not use "review" maybe "check-in".

# ACT Publication Process

This document describes a process for writing, reviewing, approving, and maintaining Accessibility Conformance Testing (ACT) Rules for formal publication by the W3C Accessibility Guidelines Working Group (AGWG). Such a commonly agreed upon WCAG Ruleset contributes to more consistent interpretation of how to test conformance to the W3C Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG), more consistent results from conformance testing, and more transparency and documentation of the testing process.

Much of the tasks in this process are delegated to ACT Task Force (ACT TF), which is a sub-group of AGWG. ACT TF carries out initial review and prepares proposals for AGWG, which has the final say as the maintainer of WCAG and the authoritative body for interpretation.

> Rule writing, reviewing, approving, and maintaining is a joint work between the ACT TF and the ACT Rules Community Group through regular joint meetings. Any other groups interested in contributing rules to the WCAG ruleset should contact the co-facilitator(s) of the ACT Task Force. The ACT publication process is designed to publish high-quality ACT rules to the W3C website. 

Reviewer 6: Suggest "...joint work **effort** between..."

Reviewer 6: Unless a new co-facilitator was found, "co-facilitators" should be  "facilitator."

3. If AG requests non-editorial, the liaison is tasked to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).

## Public Feedback

Public feedback received on the WCAG Ruleset is processed by the ACT Task Force. Questions or issues can either be submitted directly into the ACT Task Force GitHub repository, or be copied into GitHub issues from questions sent to the ACT public mailing list.

Wherever possible, the ACT Task Force will work with the ACT Rules Community Group to come up with a joint answer to the questions. If the comment is about a proposed rule, or a proposed change to a rule a public issue is created, and an answer is sent referencing the issue. If the comment is on an approved rule and changes are necessary, a liaison is picked, and the change request is handled as survey feedback, starting in the [validation](#4-validation) step. 

For the ACT Task Force agenda, public feedback will be prioritised over review of proposed rules. This ensures responsiveness to the wider community. The ACT Task Force should respond to questions within 5 work days. This may be a brief reply that indicates when a full response is expected.

> ## Annual Review

Author: ```suggestion
## Annual Check
```

Since technologies and standards frequently change, rules require regular maintenance. To ensure quality over time, the ACT Task Force will check every **approved rule** in the WCAG Ruleset at least once a year, to ensure it is still current and correct. If any changes are deemed necessary, a liaison is picked and the change request is handled as survey feedback, starting in the [validation](#4-validation) step. 

> Every time a rule is [validated](#4-validation), it is checked to make sure it is up to date. This counts as an annual review, so that only rules that have not been surveyed in 12 months need to go through a separate review. If a rule has not been reviewed for 12 months, an ACT facilitator opens an issue for it, and assigns it to that rule's liaison. The liaison has 10 work days to review if the rule needs to be updated. If the rule needs to be updated, the liaison has another 10 work days to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).

Author: ```suggestion
Every time a rule is [validated](#4-validation), it is checked to make sure it is up to date. This counts as an annual check, so that only rules that have not been surveyed in 12 months need to go through a separate check. If a rule has not been checked for 12 months, an ACT facilitator opens an issue for it, and assigns it to that rule's liaison. The liaison has 10 work days to check if the rule needs to be updated. If the rule needs to be updated, the liaison has another 10 work days to create a [draft proposal](#1-draft-proposal).
```

| Failed         | `failed` or `cantTell`                  |
| Inapplicable   | `inapplicable`, `cantTell`, or `passed` |

> Before an ACT rule is approved, at minimum one full implementation is required. The following information must be provided for at least one accessibility testing tool or testing methodology:

Author: ... not complete with cantTell.

3. If the test mode of the implementation was _manual_ or _semi-automated_, a declaration of the implementor that these manual outcomes are the result of a documented step by step test procedure included in the implementation.

## Complete implementations

An implementation is considered to be "complete" when the following requirements are met:

1. There must be at least one implementation that for all passed and inapplicable test cases reports a pass or inapplicable outcome, and that for all failed test cases reports a failed outcome.

> 2. All input rules of a composite rule must also have at least one implementation for which the previous requirement is true.

Author: ```suggestion
2. All input rules of a composite rule must also have at least one implementation for which the previous requirement is true.

## Editorial Changes

Parts of the process can be bypassed when changes are editorial. If the author believes a change is editorial, this must be indicated in the PR description. If there is disagreement with the reviewers about this, a change should not be considered editorial. Use the following indicators to decide if a change is editorial:

- An editorial change does not add new content. New expectations, test cases, assumptions, accessibility support cases, background info, etc. are not editorial.
- Editorial changes do not change the meaning of the rule, except if for issues where the intended meaning is obvious, such as typos in role names
- Test cases are not changed, except for trivial fixes that are unlikely to impact an implementation.
```

2. All input rules of a composite rule must also have at least one implementation for which the previous requirement is true.

> 

Author: Heading on what a liaison is.

## Complete implementations

An implementation is considered to be "complete" when the following requirements are met:

1. There must be at least one implementation that for all passed and inapplicable test cases reports a pass or inapplicable outcome, and that for all failed test cases reports a failed outcome.

2. All input rules of a composite rule must also have at least one implementation for which the previous requirement is true.

## Editorial Changes

Parts of the process can be bypassed when changes are editorial. If the author believes a change is editorial, this must be indicated in the pull request description. If there is disagreement with the reviewers about this, a change should not be considered editorial. Use the following indicators to decide if a change is editorial:

- An editorial change does not add new content. New expectations, test cases, assumptions, accessibility support cases, background info, etc. are not editorial.
- Editorial changes do not change the meaning of the rule, except if for issues where the intended meaning is obvious, such as typos in role names

> - Test cases are not changed, except for trivial fixes that are unlikely to impact an implementation.

Author: ```suggestion
- Test cases are not changed, except for trivial fixes that are unlikely to impact an implementation.

## Liaisons

A liaison is a member of the ACT TF or CG, appointed to for specific rule maintenance activities. Preferably this is one of the authors of the rule.

```
